# Practice Areas

## Unpaid Wages and Overtime

“Non-exempt,” or hourly, employees are entitled to pay for all of their time
worked, including time spent working through lunch and time worked away from
the office.  Employers must compensate employees for this time, even if it is
only fifteen minutes a day.

In California, most non-exempt employees are entitled to overtime pay for any
time worked over eight hours in one day, over forty hours in a work week, and
for the first eight hours worked on the seventh consecutive day worked in a
work week.  Overtime generally must be paid at one-and-a-half times (1.5x) the
regular hourly rate of pay.  However, employees are also entitled to overtime
at double time (2x) the regular hourly rate of pay for all hours worked over
twelve in a workday and all hours worked over eight on the seventh consecutive
day worked in a work week.

California and federal law also regulate meal times and breaks, compensatory
time off, and when an employer must pay wages.  Employees who experience
violations of these regulations by their employer may be eligible to collect
penalties against their employer.

## Misclassification of Employees

“Exempt” employees are those employees who are exempt from the protections of
certain state and federal wage laws, such as overtime pay.  Salaried employees
are often considered exempt employees.  However, not all salaried employees are
properly classified as exempt from these laws.  If an employer misclassifies an
employee as exempt, the employee is nonetheless entitled to receive overtime
for all hours that he or she worked over eight in a day and over forty in a
work week, in accordance with California and federal overtime laws.

## Workplace Discrimination

You have the right to be free from unlawful discrimination at work.  While
employers may make managerial decisions that negatively affect you, such as
scheduling work hours, issuing reprimands, and firing, it is unlawful for them
to make these types of decisions based on an employee’s “protected
classifications.”  These protected classifications include an employee’s:  age,
race, national origin, sex and gender identity (including transgender), sexual
orientation, pregnancy, disability, religious affiliation, military status and
marital status. 

## Workplace Harassment

Harassment, including sexual harassment, is all too common in the workplace.
Unlawful harassment may be offensive conduct based on one’s sex, sexual
orientation, disability or other protected classification.

## Retaliation

In California, employers may not harass, discipline or otherwise retaliate
against an employee because the employee reports possible workplace
discrimination or harassment, either to the employer or to a government agency.
For example, if an employee complains of sexual harassment to her employer, the
employer may not then pass her over for a promotion because she complained of
the harassment.

## Family and Medical Leave

Certain California employees are protected by the federal Family and Medical
Leave Act (FMLA) and the state California Family Rights Act (CFRA).  Covered
employees are entitled to take leave from work for reasons such as one’s own
serious health condition, to care for one’s child, parent or spouse, or for the
birth or adoption of a child.  If your employer has denied you the right to
medical leave or has discriminated against you for exercising your right to
medical leave, you may have a basis for financial recovery.

## Severance Agreements

A well-negotiated severance agreement may allow you to transition from your
current job to a future opportunity with a severance package that you deserve.
Skillful negotiation and leverage of potential claims against your employer are
key to achieving a fair severance package.

## Wrongful Termination

California and federal law prohibit employers from terminating an employee
based the employee’s protected classification, such as the employee’s sex,
race, disability or age.

## Contact Us

If you believe that you may have been treated unlawfully at work, please
contact the experienced and attentive lawyers at Kosinski and Thiagaraj, LLP to
schedule a free phone consultation.
